# MATHEMATICAL MODELLING OF ARTIFICIAL HEART VALVE PERFORMANCE

D.A. Dolgov, Y.N. Zakharov
Kemerovo State University, Kemerovo, Russia
e-mail:

9erthalion6@gmail.com

Key words: viscous inhomogeneous fluid, artificial heart valve, immersed
boundary method

Motivation and Aim: In recent years interest in mathematical modeling of blood
flow in vessels and artificial human heart valves significantly increased
because of development of new methods of cardiovascular system diseases
treatment. An artificial heart valve is an extremely complex system, which must
meet a number of requirements, and mathematical modeling can simplify valve
development and optimization process. In this paper we propose the mathematical
model and its numerical implementation to describe three dimensional blood flow
dynamics in artificial heart valve and its numerical implementation.

Methods and Algorithms: The mathematical model, proposed to solve a
nonstationary problem of blood flow in valve, allows to take into consideration
main features of heart valve performance: the inhomogeneous blood structure,
the valve leaflets flexibility and complex geometry. Blood is described as a
viscous incompressible inhomogeneous fluid and consists of two components (e.g.
plasma and formed elements). The fluid motion can be defined by Navier-Stokes
nonstationary system of differential equations with variable density and
viscosity. We model a valve leaflet as a flexible impenetrable surface which is
deformed under the fluid pressure. The leaflet deformation and interaction with
the fluid can be described by the immersed boundary method. The valve leaflets
influence on the fluid is described by body forces in the equation of fluid
motion.

Results and conclusions: The mathematical model and its numerical
implementation were applied to the problem of blood flow inside aortic valve
with different forms and admixture distribution to define the dynamics of
described biological system, including the flow rate, leafters geometry, stress
distribution.

Acknowledgements: The research is performed as part of the government contract
1.630.1.2014/K.

References: 
